---
aliases:
  - /deploying-django/
title: "Deploying Django"
date: "2011-10-30"
tags: ["programming", "devops", "python", "django"]
slug: "deploying-django"
description: "Deploying Django code is insanely hard.  There's no simple way to solve a lot of these issues."
---


![Cookie Monster][]


Over the past two years, I've learned a *hell* of a lot about deploying Django
apps into production.  And yes, I really do mean a **HELL** of a lot.  While
Django is a great web framework, one of its primary weaknesses (in my opinion)
is a lack of strong deployment documentation and community standards.  There
has been no easy way (until now, *kinda*) to deploy your apps into production
in a reliable, simple fashion.  Period.

Sure, there are excellent *best practices* that a few **awesome** programmers
follow, but for the majority of users, the best practices are just too complex
and time consuming to setup and administer for typical site.


## Real World Deployment

Let's pretend, for a moment, that you're an intermediate Django programmer.
You spend 8 hours a day working on a single project that is built purely in
python / Django.  Your [primary main objective][] is to keep your users happy
(fix bugs, release new features, etc.).  You're fairly familiar with the Django
ecosystem: you know which apps to look at for solving various problems, and you
know where to find information you don't already know.

Let's further assume that you're also an all-around-geek, and manage your own
[Rackspace][] or [Amazon][] servers which you use to host your Django app.  You
boot your fresh new [Ubuntu][] cloud server, then install [Apache][] and
[mod_wsgi][] to run your Django site.  You then spin up a second server and
install [PostgreSQL][], which your site uses as its primary data store.

You think you're doing a good job--you wrote your app and got it online, spent
time learning how to use your cloud provider's APIs to boot up your new server,
and you managed to install, configure, and administrate your app.  Furthermore,
you know where to look for problems: apache error logs, Django 500 and 404
emails, etc.  In your mind, you're *awesome*.

When you think about the amount of effort you put into your work, you feel
highly accomplished.  Not only did you do a good job getting everything
running, but you also spent **years** learning all the technologies that power
your site: HTML, CSS, Javascript, Python, Django, Linux, etc.

... BUT ...

After three months of building your site, and 1 month of getting it running in
production, you finally have real users.  As a matter of fact, you're getting
about 20 hits per second.  While this may be awesome for business, your web
server's load is 14, and your users' HTTP requests start timing out.

Since your PostgreSQL server still has reasonable load, you decide to scale
your site horizontally by spinning up a second web server, and splitting HTTP
requests between the two.  This way, you can serve twice as many users and keep
your site running smoothly.

You spin up a new server, install Apache / mod_wsgi again, then copy your code
over.  After a few hours researching HTTP load balancing, you decide to use
[HAProxy][] to proxy your requests.  A week later, you have HAProxy running on
a new server, and can see HTTP requests hitting each web server.

Finally, your users can view your site again, whew.  **WRONG**.

As your site has grown, you've noticed that several pages have started eating
lots of CPU cycles.  Upon further analysis, you see the problem: rendering the
dashboard page requires about 30 time intensive SELECT queries on your
PostgreSQL server.  **Damn**.  To make matters worse, you can tell that if you
don't get this fixed right away, the database server will be destroyed by the
week's end.

To avoid repeating the large SQL queries, you decide to cache the page data for
an hour the first time a user visits the page.  That way, repeat requests for
that page will not generate repeat SQL queries, thereby taking load off the
database.  You provision a new server, and install [memcached][].  Two days
later, you've got a caching server working, and you've rewritten most of your
Django views to utilized memcached.

Now you can finally get back to coding!  **WRONG**.

Your pages are still loading slowly.  You analyze your code base, and realize
the new problem: once your cached page expires (at the end each hour), multiple
users hit the page simultaneously, generating numerous time intensive SQL
queries, effectively hammering your database server and causing HTTP timeouts.
Back to the drawing board.

**At this point, you're frustrated with progress.**

After a few days of research, you discover how to solve your caching problems:
[cache invalidation][] + [distributed message queues][].  Essentially, each
time a user adds new data to your site, you'll:

-   Dump a small message onto the queue that says "do some processing, then
    update the cache".
-   Your queue will get the message, and hold onto it.
-   Your worker processes will grab the oldest message from the queue, one at a
    time, and do what needs to be done (do processing, update the cache, etc.).

This way, your page cache is never stale, and you never run into the same
traffic stampede issues that you previously had.

The only problem now is that setting up a distributed message queue is a lot of
work.  You need to setup a [RabbitMQ][], [celerybeat][], and one (or more)
[celeryd][] servers.

Two weeks and a lot of [energy drinks][] later, you've got it all set up and
working.  You've rewritten most of your initial Django code to make good use of
celery and memcached.

But...  Then you realize the PostgreSQL server is dying.  **FUCK!**

Even with all the fancy new scaling tools implemented, the database just can't
handle the constant load.  Two weeks later you finish deploying multiple
PostgreSQL read slaves, and configure your Django database routing rules to use
the new PostgreSQL cluster effectively.

At this point, you're dying to get back to programming.  You've spent almost
two months keeping your site running, but that's it.  You haven't had time to
work on bug fixes, or feature requests for your site.  To top it all off,
you've had to rapidly learn numerous new technologies just to keep things
going, and you're afraid that if anything fails, you'll be completely screwed.

In order to maintain your sanity, you spend a few more days researching server
management tools, and discover [puppet][].  Then...

![George Bush][]

**Oh my fucking GOD!**

Yes, grasshopper!  You now see it: you have only begun to discover the amount
of work that lays ahead.  You've barely scratched the surface as to the tools,
methods, and skills necessary to manage and operate even the *simplest* of
production sites.  Your work is cut out for you.


## The Truth

If I've learned anything in the past two years working with production Django
deployments, it's that **deployment is fucking hard**.  Every real project I've
put into production over the past few years has involved hundreds (if not
thousands) of hours worth of infrastructure management.  Even though I'd like
to think that my overall sysadmin skills are slightly above that of your
typical programmer, I still spend an inordinate amount of time working on
infrastructure.

After speaking to loads of other programmers in the Django community, I
realize it isn't only me who has this problem, it's **everyone**.  While I
don't have any statistics to back this up, I'd estimate that typical Django
programmers spends at **least** half their time working on infrastructure
related tasks.

**The Django community is at an interesting place right now.**

We're sitting on verge of an enormous technology breakthrough.  There are
currently sufficient tools, methods, and practices that allow Django developers
to build simple, robust, and scalable applications.  However, the community as
a whole lacks direction and confidence in deployment.


## What Django Needs

In order to fix the deployment problems in the Django community, several things
need to happen.  If community members realize the importance of this problem,
it is more likely to get resolved quickly.  By solving the deployment problem,
Django can set an unprecedented standard for web development.

First and foremost, all of the Django hosting companies around ([Heroku][],
[Gondor][], etc.) need to really step up their game.  These companies are in
the best position to fix the deployment problem.  Their livelihood depends on
making developer's lives easier, and since they have developers giving them
money, they're in the best position to gather real world usage data from
numerous Django developers, and build elegant deployment abstractions.

I'd personally like to see Heroku succeed as the dominant Django hosting
provider.  In my opinion, they are tackling the deployment problem the best
way.  Their model is simple: provide solid support for hosting your apps, and a
[large collection of add-ons][] that any developer can easily add and remove
from their site in an instant.  Their addons allow you (as a developer) to
completely ignore 90% of typical infrastructure work, focusing purely on
application code.  Furthermore, since Heroku is running on Amazon's cloud, it's
likely that their prices will drop over time as their user base continues to
grow and Amazon's infrastructure becomes a commodity.

Second, we need strong deployment leadership from Django's core team.  In my
opinion, [Jacob Kaplan-Moss][] is best posed to take on the role of
deployment-[BDFL][].  Jacob (one of the Django creators and core developers) is
an outspoken [devops][] advocate, frequently giving presentations on Django
deployment and infrastructure best practices.

With a strong leader willing to tackle the deployment problem, the official
[deployment documentation][] needs to be heavily updated.  Currently, the
official documentation is woefully inadequate--covering only the most basic
deployment patterns.  In order for the Django community to continue to grow and
succeed, the official deployment documentation needs to have a strong voice and
opinion--it needs to say:

-   Here's how to do caching right.
-   Here's how to properly setup asynchronous tasks.
-   Here's how to scale your database for certain usage patterns.
-   etc.

While this will surely upset a lot of people who believe in Python's
flexibility, Django **needs** to take an opinionated stance in regards to
tools, patterns, and practices.  Without a stance, the community will stay as
it is: stuck in a confused state regarding deployment.  If we (as a community)
can agree to take a stance on deployment: decide what to do, and what not to
do--it will revolutionize Django.

Third, the open source community needs to develop high-level abstractions for
common patterns.  There are currently excellent tools available to Django
developers wanting to build production apps (celery, RabbitMQ, memcached,
redis, etc.), but due to the complexity associated with setting them up and
managing them, they are not used nearly as often as they should be.

Developers need tools to fully automate and manage various pieces of Django
infrastructure.  If it was as easy to deploy an auto-scaling distributed cache
as it was to start a Django app on the command line, Django developers
everywhere would be much happier.


## I Have a Dream

In my dream, all Django developers (from the newest to the most experienced)
can rapidly build their web apps, knowing that production deployment is at most
10 minutes away from completion.

Imagine a world where (as a developer) you can build an app, and have it
running live in a best-practices, scalable, and sustainable way in no more than
10 minutes.  The possible benefits are tremendous:

-   Production Django sites will typically be more reliable than their
    counterparts.
-   Django developers worldwide will have confidence in not only writing, but
    also deploying their applications to the world.
-   New developers will be greatly attracted to Django as a framework, due to
    its immensely simplified and powerful deployment options.
-   Django developers will be able to spend more time, each day, writing Python
    and Django code, instead of focusing their efforts on infrastructure
    management.

**We're at an awesome time in Django history.**

Each of us has the ability to greatly effect the future of the framework we all
love so much.  We have the ability to influence the newest generation of sites
that power the internet.  We need to collectively decide to show our fellow
developers the light, and remove the confusion that exists around deployment.


**EDIT**: Based on the feedback I received from this article, I decided to
write a series on deploying Django.  If you're interested, you can read the
first part [here][].

**UPDATE**: If you liked this post, you may want to check out my new book on
Heroku, [The Heroku Hacker's Guide][].  It covers ideal ways to deploy your web
applications on Heroku to reduce the pain.


  [Cookie Monster]: /static/images/2011/cookie-monster.png "Cookie Monster"
  [primary main objective]: http://www.southparkstudios.com/full-episodes/s03e10-chinpoko-mon "Primary Main Objective"
  [Rackspace]: http://www.rackspacecloud.com/3149.html "Rackspace"
  [Amazon]: http://aws.amazon.com/ "Amazon Web Services"
  [Ubuntu]: http://www.ubuntu.com/ "Ubuntu"
  [Apache]: http://www.apache.org/ "Apache"
  [mod_wsgi]: http://code.google.com/p/modwsgi/ "mod_wsgi"
  [PostgreSQL]: http://www.postgresql.org/ "PostgreSQL"
  [HAproxy]: http://haproxy.1wt.eu/ "HAProxy"
  [memcached]: http://memcached.org/ "memcached"
  [cache invalidation]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cache_invalidation "Cache Invalidation Wiki"
  [distributed message queues]: http://activemq.apache.org/how-do-distributed-queues-work.html "How Distributed Queues Work"
  [RabbitMQ]: http://www.rabbitmq.com/ "RabbitMQ"
  [celerybeat]: http://docs.celeryproject.org/en/latest/userguide/periodic-tasks.html "celerybeat"
  [celeryd]: http://celeryproject.org/ "celery"
  [energy drinks]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B000NGNEKY/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1789&creative=390957&creativeASIN=B000NGNEKY&linkCode=as2&tag=rdegges-20 "Rockstar No Carb Energy Drinks"
  [puppet]: https://puppetlabs.com/ "puppet"
  [George Bush]: /static/images/2011/george-bush.png "George Bush"
  [Heroku]: http://www.heroku.com/ "Heroku"
  [Gondor]: https://gondor.io/ "Gondor"
  [large collection of add-ons]: https://addons.heroku.com/ "Heroku Addons"
  [Jacob Kaplan-Moss]: http://jacobian.org/ "Jacob Kaplan-Moss"
  [BDFL]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benevolent_Dictator_For_Life "BDFL Wiki"
  [devops]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DevOps "devops Wiki"
  [deployment documentation]: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/howto/deployment/ "Django Deployment Documentation"
  [here]: {{< relref "2011/devops-django-part-1-goals.md" >}} "Devops Django - Part 1 - Goals"
  [The Heroku Hacker's Guide]: http://www.theherokuhackersguide.com/ "The Heroku Hacker's Guide"
