---
aliases:
  - /system76-bonobo-ubuntu-laptop-review/
title: "System76 'Bonobo' Ubuntu Laptop Review"
date: "2011-12-14"
tags: ["review"]
slug: "system76-bonobo-ubuntu-laptop-review"
description: "My review of the System76 Bonobo laptop.  It's pretty great, I'd recommend it for any developers who love Linux as much as I do."
---


![System76 Lid][]

![System76 Screen][]

![System76 Side][]

![System76 Keyboard][]


I don't normally write product reviews on my blog (although I do frequently
write [amazon reviews][]), so this is a bit out of place.  However, I feel the
need to write about the [System76 laptop][] I recently purchased.

**NOTE**: I'm *not* making any money off this.  I'm not in any way affiliated
with System76.  I don't have any affiliate links, or any of that jazz.

As a programmer (and more importantly, nerd) I spend a majority of my days (and
nights) online.  As a Linux guy, finding a decent laptop that has full hardware
compatibility can be a huge pain.  Over the past year I've been using a laptop
as my primary machine, which has compounded this issue and made it a nightmare
for me to find new laptops when an old one dies.  In case you're wondering,
I've gone through 4 laptops this past year, and each time spent no less than 4
days finding a suitable replacement.

The problem with finding a decent Linux laptop is that even if you google the
exact model you plan on purchasing before hand, there is no guarantee it will
work.  At least in my experience, Google'ing laptop models before purchase is a
lot like playing Russian roulette--you may get lucky, but it's a risk.

The last time I purchased a laptop earlier this year I spent quite a while
online researching the best options, eventually settling with a high end HP
that was within my price range.  Fast forward two weeks to delivery day--I'm
installing Ubuntu on the laptop, and to my dismay, there are no video card
drivers available.  *Damn.*


## System76

After having several awful Linux laptop experiences, I asked some friends to
recommend a decent hardware vendor with full Linux support.  That's when I
first heard of [System76][].  They're a hardware vendor that builds and ships
Ubuntu ready laptops, desktops, and servers.

A few weeks back, when my current laptop started dying, I decided to give
System76 a try and I ordered their [Bonobo][] model (their largest laptop).  I
got the base model with a couple small modifications:

-   A 120G SSD drive (I like speed).
-   8G of RAM.

I decided to go with their largest model (it's a 17.3") because I love looking
at lots of code on a single screen.  I don't use any external monitors, so
having a large screen is important for my day-to-day work flow.

With the background out of the way, here's my review of the actual laptop.


## First Impressions

System76 did a great job on first impressions.  You know how most laptops
typically come in awful boxes, filled with tons of spam?  System76 doesn't do
that at all.  The shipping box was simple, easy to open, and not cluttered.

Inside their shipping box there was simply the laptop, the carrying case, and a
card with links to the System76 website for help.  Elegant.

My first thoughts upon seeing the actual laptop (once I pulled it out and set
it on my table) was: *woa*.  The laptop is really big and sturdy looking.  It's
got a metallic casing around it (not plastic), and looks expensive.  The lid of
the laptop has the System76 logo etched into it, which looks brilliant.

The screen on this thing is amazing.  It's huge, clear, and surprisingly crisp.
Maybe I've just been using shitty laptops 'till now, but this thing makes my
old Sony Vaio look like a child's toy.

The keyboard is sturdy with thick, responsive keys.  This is a big win for me,
as I type fast, and having highly responsive keys just feels **right**.

Also: there are no stickers on the laptop.  I hate getting a new machine
covered in Intel, Windows, and other ridiculous stickers.  This gives the
laptop a really nice clean look, and it's refreshing to not be bombarded by
hardware ads.


## Software Support

After working my way through the first boot process just to see what it was
like (it was fine), I popped in my own Ubuntu 11.04 CD and formatted the box.
I was curious to see if this laptop was truly Linux compatible, or if it was
just loaded with a bunch of special drivers to make things work decently.

Surprisingly, I had absolutely no issues installing Ubuntu.  Everything worked
perfectly out of the box.  Web cam, microphone, video card drivers, etc.  It
was a pretty great feeling to get everything installed fresh with no issues
whatsoever.


## Speed

This thing is fast.  Really, insanely fast.  I don't have much else to say
about this, except that I've never had such a fast System.  Ubuntu boots in
less than 2 seconds, consistently.


## Pricing

If you've ever purchased a laptop online from a major hardware vendor (Dell,
HP, etc.), you'll notice that when customizing the laptop components, you've
got a million choices.  It's typical to be able to choose from at least 20
different CPUs, 30 times of RAM, etc.

From what I saw, System76 takes a different approach.  All their base Systems
have excellent hardware, and they only offer a few upgrade options.  I prefer
this a lot more to the traditional model.  Why?  Because pricing is a lot
clearer.  Instead of purchasing a laptop that you think will cost 500$, and
then upgrading it to make it decent and then realizing that the price is now
3,000$--you know right off the bat what sort of price you're looking at.

While this laptop was expensive (I paid ~1,800$), its hardware stats are
comparable to similarly priced HP laptops.


## Problems

**NOTE**: I've only been using this laptop for two weeks so far.  If I
experience any other problems I'll update this post to include them.

The power key.  The most annoying problem I've had with the laptop to date is
the power key.  It's hard to press.  I can push it down easily enough, but it
seems like you have to push it down and hold it for a second for it to actually
recognize your key press.  This is pretty annoying as it takes me at least two
tries to turn the thing on.

The caps lock / num lock / wifi icons that light up when they're on are ugly.
They look like they're pixelated globe icons from the 1980s.  System76--if you
read this, consider using something a bit nicer looking.  They really detract
from the clean, professional look of the laptop.

Lastly, the power cable for this thing is massive.  The laptop doesn't use your
standard size power cord, it has a massive black box at least 3x's larger than
any laptop cord I've owned before.  While I understand this is the largest
model of laptop, and it has high end power-hungry hardware, the cord size still
matters (at least to me).  I haven't carried this laptop anywhere with me yet,
but I assume that when I do, my carrying case will be at least a few pounds
heavier with the cord inside.


## Conclusion

System76 makes a damn good laptop, as far as I'm concerned.  Despite a few
minor flaws, this thing has been excellent.  I can honestly say that I've never
owned such a great laptop in my life.

It's fast, sturdy, looks great, and has perfect Linux hardware compatibility.

If you're a Linux guy looking for a great laptop, I'd strongly recommend you
give System76 a shot for your next purchase.

You can check out all their systems on their main site:
[http://www.system76.com/][]


  [System76 Lid]: /static/images/2011/system76-lid.png "System76 Lid"
  [System76 Screen]: /static/images/2011/system76-screen.png "System76 Screen"
  [System76 Side]: /static/images/2011/system76-side.png "System76 Side"
  [System76 Keyboard]: /static/images/2011/system76-keyboard.png "System76 Keyboard"
  [amazon reviews]: http://www.amazon.com/gp/pdp/profile/A3E3Y9R7W5NAI8 "My Amazon Reviewer Profile"
  [System76 laptop]: https://www.system76.com/laptops/model/bonx6 "System76 Bonobo Laptop"
  [System76]: http://www.system76.com/home/ "System76 Ubuntu Systems"
  [Bonobo]: https://www.system76.com/laptops/model/bonx6 "System76 Bonobo"
  [http://www.system76.com/]: https://www.system76.com/home/ "System76"
